---
layout: post
title: "A Diary of Downtime from Work"
---

Last month, I was informed that the work with one of my main clients was to be reduced. While it's never a nice thing to hear, particularly if you feel invested in the project as a developer, I take heart from the mutual feeling of wanting to continue the working relationship - to see through the project to launch, to add more features, and to continue building it towards success in the future. It's a reminder of the value of building trust with your clients and investing yourself in the projects that you work on. It's a key ingredient of being a freelancer and maintaining a network that can rely on you.

With imminent downtime from work, I needed to consider what to do. I first went to look for my CV. It was nowhere to be seen. I checked everywhere, but I just couldn't find it. It seems a bit odd that I could lose such a thing, but after considering how outdated it must have been (I probably last distributed it nine years ago), it didn't seem like a huge issue to me. A [fresh version](/assets/documents/philip-tomlinson-profile-v1.pdf) could easily be made. And that set the tone for what I wanted to do with my downtime from work.

It's such a long time that I took stock of myself as a developer. I have enjoyed working on certain projects, but there is always something I want to try out in my own free time, yet I've rarely had the capacity to do so. I realised that I needed to spend a little bit of "me" time. What do I want to play around with? What type of developer do I position myself as? How do I showcase myself? Where do I showcase myself? What do I showcase? How do I reconnect with my professional network?

Instead of diving straight into another project, I decided to take a hybrid approach of mixing some work with existing clients with this "me" time.

I've been working on a [Blazor](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/apps/aspnet/web-apps/blazor) project for the last eight months. It's been immensely satisfying to learn and work with a framework that is leading edge in the world of web applications. Am I now a Blazor developer? Well, to a large degree, yes! Yet, there appear to be limited opportunities of Blazor contract work compared to something like React, which is firmly entrenched as the most popular front-end stack of the lot.

As an all-round front-end web developer, specialisation becomes the challenge. Does a job title of "Web Developer" mean anything to anybody any more? Or even "Front-end Developer", as I describe myself? Perhaps they do still hold relevant meaning, but they cover such a wide area that ultimately means we are adaptable to a number of frameworks and languages. Is that useful when it comes to a recruiter looking for, say, a React Developer?

With this in mind, I wanted to do a number of things with my downtime from work.

Disappearing from LinkedIn was a mistake. I left the platform a few years ago because I thought it was unimportant. It wasn't my main source of gaining work, but it's probably wrong to think of it as just that. It's more of a platform to keep your professional activities up to date, and to keep those you're connected with informed. Letting people know that you're still doing what you love may sound silly, but it's important that they are aware of you. So, I've built my [LinkedIn profile](https://www.linkedin.com/in/philtdev/) back up to stay in touch with my network.

I've neglected my Coderover website. It used to be a WordPress website with a theme that I developed based on the Thematic reset theme (no longer compatible with PHP8). I rarely kept the website up to date. The content didn't lend itself to being updated. I've never considered myself a blogger, so I never wrote a blog post (until now). To be brutally honest, I'm not sure anybody was paying attention to the website, which then becomes a bit of a vicious circle! It has shamefully been a Plesk holding page for the past few years.

I decided to give the Coderover website life again in the form of [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/). I wanted to develop something in Jekyll for a while. It's a simple yet great alternative to WordPress if you want to keep it simple and just serve static content. Its very nature means that it's super-fast and lightweight, and it does the job if you're looking for a website that serves simple web pages and blog posts. 

On a WordPress-related note, I've been meaning to voluntarily develop a new theme for Sabden Football Club. Embarrassingly, this has been nine years in the making after my first version of the theme, and it has been more or less stripped down to a shell of what it was originally intended to be. In the last week, I set up a local WordPress development environment to develop a modern [WordPress block theme](https://wordpress.org/documentation/article/block-themes/) for the site. It is a learning curve, certainly, but it's underway, and it's going to be an interesting "Sunday" challenge.

This week, I attended the [GitHub Galaxy 2023](https://galaxy.github.com/) virtual fireside chats and forums. This is something that I've never done enough of. I've taken a lot from it, and it brings about a realisation of how easy it is to lag behind when you don't expose yourself to things like this. Being somewhat of an introvert and socially shy, I even mustered up the courage to contribue "on-stage" in the forum about collaboration! I'm eyeing up further virtual summits, particularly those relating to open source projects, and it would be great to be able to both take and give to some these.

The final part of what I've been trying to improve upon isn't so much to do with work as it is to do with being socially happy. I mentioned that I'm a bit of an introvert, and it is sometimes difficult to motivate myself to be social. I've had many great personal relationships with people over the years, but I've rarely done enough to keep those relationships going thereafter. I have probably lost one or two great friends at university because of this - friends that I haven't spoken to in years, yet were soulmates at the time. Yes, daily life does get in the way, but even if you're socially unmotivated, I know deep down that I need to keep those relationships and connections going, even if I'm "not in the mood" at the time. I've just had a great time at a local bar with a couple of old coworkers in spite of feeling tired and bad weather. It's more than worth making the effort.

Next week, I'll be back on a collaborative Blazor project, and I feel more motivated than I have in a long time - that it's not just a bunch of tasks to complete, but something that I can continue investing myself in as a developer. The downtime, although unsettling at first, is probably just what I needed.
